[clang-tidy] Add new check bugprone-unintended-char-ostream-output (#127720)
llvm/llvm-project: clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/unintended-char-ostream-output.rst

.. title:: clang-tidy - bugprone-unintended-char-ostream-output

bugprone-unintended-char-ostream-output
=======================================

Finds unintended character output from ``unsigned char`` and ``signed char`` to an
``ostream``.

Normally, when ``unsigned char (uint8_t)`` or ``signed char (int8_t)`` is used, it

> is more likely a number than a character. However, when it is passed directly to
> ``std::ostream``'s ``operator<<``, resulting in character-based output instead
> of numeric value. This often contradicts the developer's intent to print

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is more likely a number than a character. However, when it is passed directly to
``std::ostream``'s ``operator<<``, the result is the character output instead
of the numeric value. This often contradicts the developer's intent to print
```

integer values.

.. code-block:: c++

    uint8_t v = 9;

>     std::cout << v; // output '\t' instead of '9'

Reviewer: I'd use an example with the character code of an actual character like `'a'`. `'\t'` is really hard to "actually see" because it is a control character.

It could be fixed as

.. code-block:: c++

>     std::cout << static_cast<uint32_t>(v);

Reviewer 2: or
```
std::cout << +v;
```

Author: I think it is quiet magic and relies on the developer's familiarity with the C++ specification

Reviewer 3: It is "magic" but I think it might make sense to make sure that the warning is not triggered by it.

Reviewer 4: Absolutely, this is a valid code pattern (magic or not) that the tool should not warn about. 

In the docs, if wanted, we could mention both cases as examples, and also explain that unary plus leads to the same result as `static_cast<int>`.

.. title:: clang-tidy - bugprone-unintended-char-ostream-output

bugprone-unintended-char-ostream-output
=======================================

Finds unintended character output from ``unsigned char`` and ``signed char`` to an
``ostream``.

Normally, when ``unsigned char (uint8_t)`` or ``signed char (int8_t)`` is used, it
is more likely a number than a character. However, when it is passed directly to
``std::ostream``'s ``operator<<``, the result is the character output instead
of the numeric value. This often contradicts the developer's intent to print
integer values.

.. code-block:: c++

  uint8_t v = 65;
  std::cout << v; // output 'A' instead of '65'

The check will suggest casting the value to an appropriate type to indicate the
intent, by default, it will cast to ``unsigned int`` for ``unsigned char`` and
``int`` for ``signed char``.

.. code-block:: c++

  std::cout << static_cast<unsigned int>(v); // when v is unsigned char
  std::cout << static_cast<int>(v); // when v is signed char

To avoid lengthy cast statements, add prefix ``+`` to the variable can also

> suppress warnings.

Reviewer 4: Would be good to explain that this triggers an implicit promotion to `int` (even if the variable is `unsigned`).
